---
title: co-writing with algorithms
nav_order: 4
has_children: true
last_modified_date: 2020-08-18 11:03
---

{% include glossary.md %}

{% include references.md %}


<iframe width="266" height="150" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/SznhRaT77G8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# co-writing with algorithms

## exam question

_In your description for Field I, you note your interest in “the entanglements of self/other/technology” and how these entanglements “get enacted, distributed, absorbed, and reworked.” The writers that you have included on your list have very different views regarding these entanglements, especially as they relate to code and software. As Wendy Chun writes, for example, the “relationship among code and interface, action and result is always contingent and always to some extent imagined.” She goes on to outline an argument for code as fetish, as sourcery, and as re-source by emphasizing the gap between source and execution. Choose at least three central thinkers from your list and describe their articulations of the entanglements of self/other/technology/code/software. If it’s useful, include examples from your list of artworks as well, and/or discuss the framework you created to respond to your exam questions. What does it allow you to enact in relationship to this field? What entanglement(s) are you hoping to create?_

## exam response, in progress

Field exam will appear here supplemented by the surrounding pages. Watch the livestream and refresh this page to read along.



#### code layers, code liveliness
(Check the logs of this live code, by going to the link in the upper right corner of the site, then when the source code is shown, click tools at the bottom left, then Logs. You'll see a running thread of the server-side processes printed out as the site builds and rebuilds each time changes are made or data is updated.) 



#### Hayles
> “This entanglement of the bodies of texts and digital subjects is one manifestation of what I call "intermediation;' that is, complex transactions between bodies and texts as well as between different forms of media” (Hayles 2005, 7)

>“materiality [...] cannot simply be collapsed into physicality but is an emergent property generated by interactions between a work's signifying strategies and the physical characteristics it mobilizes as resources for its operations. [...T]aking materiality seriously requires different models of subjectivity than those usually assumed in textual editing, as well as changed concepts of how embodied texts relate to one another” (Hayles 2005, 9).

#### Cox
>“programs no longer encode pure logic but human social behavior too. [...] systems are embedded in larger language systems where meanings are produced through social practices. In other words, computer programs have bodies in the sense that other materialities and meanings are deeply interwoven, and these necessarily exist as part of wider social relations.” (Cox 2012, 26--27)

>“both subjectivity and code recursively write their own instrumentation. Yet the subject is not simply preprogrammed like a machine but more like code in actively combining internal and external factors, standing between what is possible and what actually exists. [...] collective and networked intelligence open up the conditions of possibility for reinvention by embracing broader contingencies, to challenge overpowering forces that wish to close them down, encapsulate and subsume them” (Cox 2012, 109).

#### Parisi
>"“digital machines are now embedded with a seamful environment of data, in which each level of computation extends into another: not through seamless compatibility but through the incorporation of incomputable data within systems. [...] the pervasive extension of algorithmic logic has now become attuned to alien regions of perception and cognition. These are zones occupied by abstract yet real incomputable states that interfere with computational calculus by anticipating new conditions of spatiotemporal experience” (Parisi 2013, 26) …”important to [...] distinguish this architecture from, the notions of interaction and responsiveness that have been developed in the context of ubiquitous computing” (Parisi 2013, 26) _Vagus, trauma, sensory, unconscious, pre, wander._
>“the effects of the unknown have become the causal motor by which control is unconditionally exercised and driven by immanent decisions about what has not yet happened” (Parisi 2013, xvii) _her "soft thought_"
>"programming culture is infected by incomputable thoughts that are yet to be accounted for. (Parisi 2013, xviii)

contrast these with Chun's critique of sourcery

#### Chun

all of this goes to my arguments to dispell the magical unthought differences between digital/analog code writing and other human writing (without ignoring their specificities, but without also fetishizing their specialness or letting their power erase our agency in those processes.)

>“The reduction of computer to source code, combined with the belief that users run our computers, makes us vulnerable to fantastic tales of the power of computing. To break free of this sourcery, we need to interrogate, rather than venerate or even accept, the grounding or logic of software.” (Chun 2008, 300)

>“The goal of software is to conflate an event with a written command. Software blurs the difference among human-readable code (readable because of another program), its machine-readable interpretation, and its execution by turning the word “program” from a verb to a noun, by turning process in time into process in space, by turning execution into inscription—or at least attempting to do so. [...] this conflation instruction or command with its product is also linked to software’s gendered, military history: in the military, there is supposed be no difference between a command given and a command completed, especially to a “girl.” (Chun 2008, 303–304).


>“This erasure of the vicissitudes of execution coincides with the conflation of data with information, information with knowledge — the assumption that what’s most difficult is the capture, rather than the analysis, of data. This erasure of execution through source code as source creates an intentional authorial subject: the computer, the program, or the user, and this source is treated as the source of meaning.” (Chun, “Sorcery”, 316)

>“interfaces stand in, more often than not, for the computer itself, erasing the medium” (Chun 2008, 318).

>“understanding code as re-source links its effectiveness to history and context. If code is performative, it is because of the community (human and otherwise) that enables such utterances to be repeated and executed, that one joins through such citation. [...] what is crucial to a performative utterance’s success or failure is its iterability, [...] What is crucial here is: first, code that succeeds must be citations—and extremely exact citations at that. There is no room for syntax errors; second, that this iterability precedes the so-called subject (or machine) that is supposedly the source of the code; and third, and most importantly, an entire structure must be in place in order for a command to be executed. This structure is as institutional and political as it is machinic.” (Chun 2008, 322)

The citational nature of code connects it to writing, community, natural language etc. (pull Hayles contrasting quote and critique it). Not that there is NO differences but they don't have all that power; I argue for a spectrum, continuum. 

#### Others

>"signifiers of voltage differences" (Kittler 150)

> “The representation of codes, whether binary, assembly, or high-level, can therefore only ever be that: a representation of what is happening at the machine level.” (Raley, "Code Surface")


### to enact, or entanglements
writing with/against (Raley/Hupaniemi)

